 organisa. organisa. plan plan plan plan intent intent intent tool tool treats tool treats tool treats tool treats tool treats ni i ym, in the motion as well. Wif someone would like to move please. Maybe the most might. Thanks Lou, thanks Susan, all in favour. The country now is carried. Disclosure of members' interests. Do we have any today? No, well we've onto item four late items. Any late items? No, no late items. So confirmation of order of meeting. No changes, Ken. No, I don't see any need for change. We do have a number of guests joining us at the meeting today. But well we're at the time. So yes, I'm hoping they'll be here at the required time. Happy to move in, Graham. Thanks Graham, a seconder. A second, Susan. Thanks, Susan. I think that was. She is all in favour, please say aye. Aye. I'm actually no carried. Okay, item six, which is confirmation of the minutes from 18 February. Have we all or take those as being read. Anything raised from those minutes? Andrew Graham speaking. I'm sorry, I'm sorry, showing me that I was at that meeting, but my name's not recorded there. Right. I was going to bring that up too. So yeah, thank you, some mistakes. Thanks Bruce. Okay, so I'm sure we can have that remedy, Sam. Yes, we'll make the changes. Thank you. Okay, so with that change, could I have a mover for the minutes to be received? Is there a true correct record, please? Thank you Marcus. Seconder. Thanks Bruce. All in favour, please say aye. Aye. I, contrary no carried. Thank you. Item seven, Jason. Has Jason joined us? He has. I see him. Notting on, hi Jason. How are you doing? Good, thank you. Great. And the floor is yours. Okay, Sam, I don't think we had issues with trying to get the presentation. Is that right? I think we had a question. Oh, no, Sam is sharing brilliant. Perfect. Thanks, Sam. Good morning. Good afternoon. Sorry, everyone. Thanks for allowing me time just to give you a quick update on where we are. As a sector for tourism, and particularly for white part district. So a report has obviously been provided to you and prepared which was our last six months performance. At the end of 31st December 2019. As you would have seen, white part district council was going through significant growth. Pretty one of the fastest growing regions for us with regards to tourism impact. You were experiencing double digit growth pretty much through visitor expenditure and also commercial accommodation. But we are here today to discuss this. Obviously a bit of a change in the dynamic given COVID and the impact for tourism, particularly as a sector. So we are going to go to the next slide, Sam. Perfect. So just first a couple of slides, obviously, just covering off some data. We're now receiving international and national data on a weekly basis from the government and also from the airlines. So no surprise, obviously, since COVID locked down in international travel restrictions, we're put in place. International visitor arrivals in New Zealand has been have been dropping it at a very sharp rate. We still do have airline connectivity, which I will go through. Because we are still maintaining what we call a baseline service for connections across the world, mainly for repatriation flights, but also for cargo and service across the country as well. Next slide, Sam. So weekly card transactions again, no surprise, obviously, overall our visitor expenditure is down significantly. But when you do look on to the left top five, obviously food, liquor and pharmacies, we are still seeing some cumulatively and some obviously weekly growth and expenditure. Compared to all our other visitor type of expenditure and transactions as well. Thanks, Sam. So the impact for us as a sector again, look, I mean, every of all of this has been reported. But just to cover off in summary, we were already impacted through the loss of China group travel, which started in the second to last week of January. So with that, all of our international facing products, our hotels, our motels, our Airbnb's were immediately impacted by that because many of China group travel actually did stay in the white hustle. They were our fourth largest international visitor market behind Australia, North America and UK, Europe. It did shut us down pretty much once international travel restrictions hit us. So the visitor economy covers more than just the tourism operators again, we've mentioned accommodation, it also impacts retail hospitality, transport providers, our operators of course, but also event organizers and major venues. And of course, mystery creek of anti-trium and Lake Harapital, a key event platforms for white part district. So I think that we're going to have a lot of things to do with the pandemic and job losses and business closures across tourism. I have down underneath that last bullet point, look, the immediate business impact that we have been coaching our businesses through and helping them get through. As some have gone into what we call temporary or seasonal closure. So again, we have a lot of seasonality and tourism, many who would close for winter have closed, but those that potentially have never closed before, we've suggested they go into hibernation. We've had a number of businesses, you know, Hobbiton was obviously one of the most public ones reported in the media, but again, all our motels, hotels, retail hospitality have pretty much reduced service and stuff. There's only essential services operating as we know, but again, with alert level three, we do see some opening up potentially in the hospitality sector for white power anyway. And then the last obviously implication for us is we have had a number of businesses who are permanently closing. Not only are these a loss, definitely to the tourism industry to try and bring people back when we don't have products, but also particularly for those vulnerable communities where some of these operators have been going for many years. Thanks, Sam. I can ask a question about that. Have you got examples of what businesses are struggling and like what who isn't closing, like who is closing and how does impacting around the one. Yeah, so particularly for white power, it has mainly been your hospitality, potentially some of your retail and also accommodation. And then you need nearly all of your accommodation has pretty much gone into hibernation or closure. They're calling it temporary closure, but there's some of them have been able to access the wage subsidy, which is great. But again, what we're going to see is the impacts are longer than the 12 week wage subsidy right now. So it's post 12 weeks, so we're quite concerned about. We have been lobbying nationally, the government and I think that's all sectors, not just tourism around potentially extending the wage subsidy for 20 weeks. We'll take a lot to restart the tourism sector again, people's propensity to travel is quite low. We will travel locally and potentially we will travel into region, to stay within the region, but to try and stand up the domestic travel market is going to be a long haul that we're looking at it to six to 12 months recovery plan for that. So lastly, I mean, nothing else to surprise you, this was just something we do for industry, so people know where we all fit. So from the tourism perspective, when we respond, obviously we're providing the industry support right now at a national level regional level and also a local level, but then we have to walk our chambers of commerce, our business associations and all local government. We have been great in actually supporting us with what we call the business and community support site for tourism businesses. And then lastly, we're obviously partnered with the Civil Defence Network around providing welfare support, not just for tourism operators. Again, it's also been utilising tourism operators, many of our caterers have now been repurposed into providing food services, pretty much all supporting the food banks and actually cooking meals. We also have a number of our transport operators and tourism being basically requisitions now to provide transport options and actually getting people around such as essential workers and many of the staff potentially we've been redeploying into the Civil Defence Network through providing security and welfare and call centre as well. So not only are we also working with civil defence also putting staff into there as well. So let's see. So obviously dealing with COVID, there's just for you to be aware there are obviously continuing issues that we're going on with COVID and with the tourism industry. First up was domestic airline connectivity, so again, New Zealand has been pretty open that they will not be restarting until alert level one. So we meet with New Zealand weekly just to see how we will try and stand the industry back up again. They're going to focus very much what we call an incremental restart. So it's doing a width and breadth strategy across the country. So potentially maybe only two or three flights into Hamilton per day. But again, it's to try and get that reach across the whole network first before they can actually stand up and have a full schedule like we have seen out of Hamilton Airport particularly over the last three to four years. Airline connectivity internationally is still continuing. So those are just some summary of some of the ones that are still flying. So again, New Zealand are still connecting into North America and Hong Kong into Australia. Fiji airlines are still flying into Fiji on a daily service. And Qatar has probably used the most to try and repatriate northern hemisphere. Travelers back to their homes through Qatar and then also Korean Airlines are still operating a daily service as well. For future again, in New Zealand, saying they will be focusing very much on the domestic market first. They will traditionally be a domestic airline for the first six to 12 months and domestic also includes Australia in the Pacific. American Airlines so far have been the only one we've met with who plan to return to New Zealand from October 2020. So they have put a stake in the ground to say when they will start flying into New Zealand again. Now the reason why I just raised international airline connectivity is because it will take this country at least two to five years before we ever go back to the type of connectivity we've had as a country previously before lockdown. So again, it's going to be a very long burn for us as a country to regain the international visitor rivals we've seen in the past. Air traffic control services up for review the reason why it has put that in there is just to let everyone know there was no white cut to airports or airfields but particularly Hamilton Airport is an impacted. But for us in the central North Island, it will do it is one that is going to be impacted around potentially the closure of air traffic control tower services. That will mean potentially that we will be redeverting the domestic network through Toronto and Hamilton. So unfortunately for our to do is last it could be our game. Lastly we've still got the investigation underway around for Cardi White Island so the work safe investigation should be going to a close shortly. There will be impacts on the tourism and suppliers around adventure tourism for this country and also we will be awaiting Qualmark which is our accreditation program particularly around health and safety for the country. Thanks, Sam. So I'm just a little bit of an update so we are now field days is going online so from the 30th of June for two weeks field days will be providing a virtual exhibition space very similar to other international events who offer this type of experience. Again, it is a trial but we do hope to bring field days back in 2021. We are not only the largest major event for White Power but it is definitely for the White Cuttle with regards to economic impact. We worked due to host New Zealand tourism awards in November that has been postponed until next year so we will reset the date for that. Exploring trends these are what we call our two main international trade shows. We are not only the other one but we are not only the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are not the other one but we are And it's a fully public live crowd of people that are on vacation and only a so a fully public live crowd of people who belong together for example first stage as well as Gilbert for four equals. He was a couple of the days whereual events that are given during the past size became a great conference that are presented by students for example, we took schools on vaccination programs that are provided by as well as support programs to aid people. led länghe was just told that, literally a couple of the days when we were in schools that were provided for a few months ago we just said Și OngГ 1 per week, we took th stehen entend to all schools as well as support schools. of schools. doing a couple of days before the provincial shoes had beenФag Taka teke afekt in le kura pido and we also have our first major event for the region. The ICC woman's cricket wheelcups scheduled for the 8th of February. Again, this one will particularly be decided by around October, November, whether we're international travel restrictions have lifted to enable some of the players to come. Otherwise, they will have to go if it does continue into isolation until the cricket wheelcup can be held. What we have seen particularly for other parts of the sector is that events have been more postponed for Y-PAR and for the wider Y-Cut region rather than completely cancelled and not returning. So there is some positivity for us as we do see this as the lead sector to enter recovery, economically and socially for the district. Excellent, Sam. So, response, we have a what we call three-tiered response plan. Obviously, this is no similar to everyone else right now. We have a mitigate process which currently in now we then have a restart phase and then we have a reimagined phase. So initially in the response phase, no difference everyone else. Lots of briefings. A lot of support, we're obviously having face-to-face briefings across all the sector long before the shutdown. And now we've moved to the virtual space. We're still doing advocacy at a national level to try and make sure we can access more business support for the region. Some of the gap right now out of government support and out of the support that Tuwaka can provide is a doesn't cover any employers for 100 employees plus. So that's quite the pointy end of town. We call it for most of our region for our big employers. Again, wage subsidy okay but outside of that there's actually no large industry support. So we've been pushing that through government to try and unlock some of that if this lockdown continues. We've been doing one-on-one operator check-ins. We have 240 listed operators with us. So again, these are daily to weekly check-ins by all our teams to make sure we have access business advice and some of the wage support. We've been doing webinars and we've now moved in the last two weeks into workforce redeployment. So again, we've been taking some organisations or employers that have maybe at least five to 10 staff members displaced through to Hobbiton who had one of the largest that around 270 and actually redeploying them and offering them redeployment options into the Kiwi-Fred industry. We placed 110 staff into Kiwi-Fred with transport from Hobbiton as well as the avocado industry which will be the next seasonal workforce will be. We'll be standing up until the end of the year. We'll put staff into supermarkets, civil defence, security and also they've been providing some services from home but again what we are going to see over the next two weeks and we're starting to measure that is the full-impact so that people that we cannot redeploy that potentially will be out of work. So if there's currently a survey underway and we'll be updating all councils and the government around the overall impact for tourism and wire cuts. Thanks, Ian. Under the restart phase so again we want to congratulate local government because obviously I'm getting some of those shovel-ready projects through with the Crown Infrastructure Partners for their consideration is a great one for the region but potentially for the sector and pretty much every district has put up around one to two tourism projects as part of shovel-ready so again we do need to focus on the future and how we will restart the region. Research, we were already in market and about to finish up our domestic perceptions and major research. This is now becoming quite timely for us and will help us inform around how we will try and bring back the domestic travellers into the region based on some of the research we've undertaken. We're also working on a major in business events restart campaign so that planning's been underway for a couple of weeks so that when we're ready to go we can push go on that. We do see events and business events and corporate travel as being the kickstarter we need for economic and social recovery across the region. New developments again you've all got new developments going on potentially in your regions. Hidden lake obviously one of your newer hotels in Cambridge and you opened on Christmas Eve so Glender and the team we've been keeping in touch with quite a lot because they haven't been in operation very long. Their impacts are quite severe so again making sure that we still have some future developments that will continue across the region to take us through the next stage. Data and insights I've touched on they've now gone to weekly so again we're sharing that information and to Walker and now we're contributing to the to Walker economic outlook as well which is great and then lastly the mighty local campaign was launched two weeks ago and that's definitely around the restart phase. Thanks Sam. So mighty local again as a partnership with ourselves to Walker all the chambers of commerce so to our move to and obviously Cambridge Chamber of Commerce plus the Waikato Chamber of Commerce all our councils the business associations it also exists in some communities in all our regional eye sites were in phase one so for the last two weeks we've been promoting businesses with contactless delivery promoting you know on people that are still doing entertainment online or virtually from within Waikato recipes from our beloved chefs well-being and fitness and this week we launched business stories so again we're starting to use this platform to promote some of the businesses and how they're pivoting into obviously response we're looking at different opportunities for their business so the idea is to try and give people hope during phase one during phase two which is obviously from alert level three we will increase the uptake away and eat from being listings and also essential services are starting to grow as well. In phase two we will move more to a local phase at the moment it's a regional platform but the idea is potentially people were able to group the types of information and services available at a local delivery level and at a district level as well and then phase three which has been hopefully all travel restrictions are lifted we will then activate the basically the the bi-local eat local event local shop visit and explore within the region and obviously that's in partnership with many communities in business associations that already have local programs such as Cambridge with their totally locally Cambridge campaigns we're working with Kelly and the team around how we would try and push via program rather than this one once we get to phase three thanks Sam. And when it comes to how we will actually respond long-term so at the moment we're in phase one so we're calling it the hyper local phase so one to three months we'll be pushing basically localism everything to do with obviously how you purchase and interact with your local community it phase two which then will move into a three to six month bracket we're estimating we can then start to do intra regional travel so we'll be targeting the drive market within the y-cuttle region where we hopefully starting to stand up community events again they can have a local level and regional business meetings might be able to begin again with social distancing at level three which is what we're planning our scenarios for six to 12 months we can then stand up the domestic market that is when potentially we will mainly focus on drive so as you've heard me say before 2.5 potentially three million people live within three hours radius of the y-cuttle region including the region itself so we'll definitely be focusing on the drive market national events will be returning as well as national meetings and then eventually corporate travel which again business are quite a good lead for us with regards to stand up for the sector again and then lastly we're planning on one to two years before we actually start to see any sort of international impact again short haul markets into Australia and the Pacific will open first and then we will eventually move back into major events international conferences and starting to bring back the corporate and leisure travel market into y-cuttle so that's the time frame we are currently doing our scenario planning for but as we all know it may change every week based on the levels we have and then lastly re-imagined so you would have seen that last week or actually two weeks ago as well the government announced that there was a call to reshape and re-imagined the tourism industry so we have been pushing for the last two to three months with tourism New Zealand and the Minister for Tourism around what we're calling a reimagining of tourism now is our chance that this is more than a shock it's actually a bit of a circuit breaker for the sector and for all business sectors for us all to look and see how could we do our businesses differently we all knew that tourism was growing in quite an exponential rate and there were some areas that were really filling the pressure such as Queenstown and Centro Lotago and Cathedral Cove some of our sites Mount Tomoruto so for us now it's great to see the government are taking this seriously so we're now working with tourism New Zealand to lead a new plan domestically and internationally but also look at all these types of questions you know we're our previous visitor rivals and expenditure growth right for the region what will success look like for us for the future for a visitor market how do we move our sector from Berman Buster gain no different to the food and fiber sector or any other business cycle and lastly how do we move to a more sustainable community led tourism and for us and the why cuts are what we call creating net benefit rather than just benefiting those that potentially were making money out of tourism we want to see communities thrive and that they have the decisionary on what sort of tourism they want so again we will be moving out 2016 tourism opportunities plan which many of you were involved in we will now be developing a destination management plan and that'll be happening nationally as well to try on what we call transform tourism for the better so there is no such word as recovery now we will not be receiving the same sorts of level of tourism as we did previously but neither we might not have the same sort of services and opportunities available in tourism as well post-COVID so again it is a good opportunity for us to look at transform in the sector. I think same I think we've got one more looking lastly just obviously I call I call it to all my life government partners I really appreciate everyone helping to promote your rates relief from missions and instrument policies not just for the tourism sector but for all business I it's great to see you all continuing with your resource consent process maybe in a more delayed way but again the liquor and food licensing is going to be more important for us particularly when we try and stand up after alert level three but we still have the regional major event strategy activation so again we are still awaiting some a decision from well-energy trust about potentially helping to establish a regional major events fund which will actually assist all the districts to be able to bid for major events again and also to attract and bid new major events into our shallvases and across the region and then lastly again just to thank you all for your continual funding to support the tourism industry and that would obviously be more important through restart in the reimagined phase and again the point I made earlier we will not be recovering to pre-covid levels for at least two five years as a sector and as a region that's pretty much it from me so have you to take any questions? Thanks Jason that's I've got to say that's a fantastic response to what must have been a massive shock to the industry yeah and of course in white power and probably a lot of white power as well at domestic tourism it's actually a lot bigger than international so we really want to see and as you have in your plan that being that being worked on as soon as it's soon as it becomes a possibility but yeah does anyone have questions just put your hands up I can see you all clear okay um yes that thanks a lot Jason and yeah fantastic um if it I think been put in by all your team you know in this situation um a couple of questions well the first one was that I noticed that in the regional major event strategy there's a new funding partner mentioned uh is that the well-energy relationship or is it all right? Great you said as well energy yeah no that's great um and the the other thing is um for your reimagining you know the future of tourism I saw that you had your stakeholders listed I didn't see the department of conservation there not that they are a tourism operator but most of our you know popular destinations you know I think a cathedral cove you know they're actually managed by the department and and I just wondered would be um worthwhile trying to get them sort of around the table so that because I hear you know they worry about the pressure points that we were experiencing and that you know just having their input you know um might be beneficial yes no look absolutely so um you're sorry about that clear the department of conservation are part of that so it's actually a joint tourism New Zealand and dock review of tourism and it's only because they they both actually contributed to the national tourism uh altitude oil strategies so they're definitely part of it we don't obviously have a lot of any national parts but we do still have a lot of crown estate um in some of the crown estate in our region are obviously some of our waterfalls and lake areas so again and along our rivers we just they will be engaging in that as well um because we did obviously have some opportunities with dock originally before covid sort of developing short walks for the region um under the great walks mentals so um that's some projects that we now have bought forward again to say can we'll dock reconsider moving some of this for the domestic market that sounds fantastic you're welcome we have any other questions Liz yeah i guess it's just a huge thank you Jason to the support you have operators um you know i've been affected a little myself and the and the calls that i get from your tina are a very encouraging it's very that's very certain um just one of the things i just wanted to check in with you on and that's um we do have a presentation a little bit later among the toutory and i see you've also given them some support and that's really great who are aligned on a lot of the international visitors and i guess it's lucky for us in some ways that there's not that many y-power operators that are aligned on international's among a toutory is probably one of them um perhaps our eyesight to a certain degree in civil-scientonational guests but other than that do you think that there are any other um aspects of y-power that are going to be greatly affected with international's because it's really where the biggest uh you know issue is going to be it's mainly going to be the sports um the sports coach so i think if we can try and get um some of the international sporting events back up and running as soon as possible depending on travel restrictions um they would be the main impact for y-power but you are correct look pretty much most of our events which are great um and our operators pretty much talk to the domestic market and i still feel that again look the y-cutter expressway um and so far the other work that potentially has been put forward for shovel ready even extending expressway down to Pia Dede that that's just all going to help the ease of domestic travel um and we definitely see the push from self-drive um obviously the motorhome and caravan association they are going to be another first leader and move her back into the region as well which is fantastic so we're working with them in AA traveler um around trying to get more people back into y-power so i think again um your geographic location um your natural environment and also your event platform um hold you in a stronger position around obviously recovering compared to other parts of our region great okay thanks very much for that you've got you've done an awful lot of work and you've got a lot more in front of you i can see um but that's great and if we've got no more queries i'll um we have a recommendation do we have a mover please thanks marker thanks clear um all in favour please say aye aye contrary no carried thanks very much Jason all the best thanks we are relying on you thank you and thanks Sam good work yes i see we have um mark sorry mark Morgan with a ship and um also um Kelvin and Andrew are there we'll get to you guys before long um but mark from uh CE Hamilton Airport um yeah the floor of yours and no just like um Jason um you've had a massive change for your business so uh um yeah let's see how you're going on thank thank you Andrew and thanks for the opportunity uh welcome to all of the uh uh elected members um hopefully we've got a presentation coming up and that should be before you now uh look today i've also got Scott Kendall my finance manager um thank you one so Scott will deal with a couple of the finance slides and uh as most of what we have to talk about is in in the in the ruins of finance um useful to have them here perhaps not quite the presentation i had intended to present uh a month ago uh but uh as we know a lot has changed and a massive amount has changed for Raul in the in the last uh three or four weeks so the presentation is is primarily and if we can stand move to the next slide is primarily um around the uh COVID-19 um response for Raul um but i've thought it was about eight or nine slides to key slides to take you through um and uh i think what you'll see is uh how we dealt with the crisis uh what the implications have been um for the group uh now and for the next 15 months uh and uh and a summary that shed some some positive light at the end of the tunnel um thanks Sam if we move on um so i guess the first point i think is useful to um you've obviously received our six-month interim results some say you're only as good as your last results but sadly that's not the uh not quite the case today but look we were travelling extremely well very very good first six months in effect on target for a record uh financial performance uh under any measure um of our SII for this this financial year but of course the net lead to our draft SRI that you've also received and uh that of course is now pretty much irrelevant and i see that you uh ironically have an appendix letter to my chair Barry Harris about um uh about OSRI and as you can imagine we are working uh very uh uh quickly towards a revised SRI for the next three years um particularly the financials but also there'll be some narrative change and some priority changing as well um we have as to say um completed a very detailed 15-month forecast through the 30 June next year that will form of course now part of the year one of the um of the SRI so look we have a um we have a presentation the rail board and myself has have a presentation to all share holding uh councils in May and we by that stage uh will have finalised the new drafts um so um moving sorry moving on to the next slide um so I think now just looking at the um the impact and look very difficult to um well it's very easy to explain in simple terms it's had a massive impact on the business but if I divided into these four areas that are before you of course the first uh is the aeronautical business um in New Zealand complete as you know suspension of flights uh so uh for us that was an immediate um loss of income really from April but from the last week of March uh and uh along with our general aviation L3 Harris of flight school basically you know 97 98% loss of our aeronautical income overnight um terminal closed and we really operating as an emergency medical um service only at the airport um had the same impact on our on our property but in fact our property is our lifeline that I will come to but again really overnight um impact on our tendencies we're quite a large landlord as you know and um but to date in Scott we'll talk a wee bit about this but to date we've had good support um from our tenants um but we're early days as we know into the next sort of three to six months as businesses work through how they're going to operate and survive during this process um we've obviously suspended the terminal um upgrade work and I'll talk to that a bit further on uh which of course was a major piece of work approximately 15 million dollars of of proposed work a hotel has been sorry if we can just go back to the previous slide Sam the hotel um impacted significantly as well uh fortunately during April we have it was um uh taken over by Ministry of Health as a isolation facility it wasn't required it was a backup to the Auckland hotels um nonetheless we have received um and we are receiving payment for the use of the hotel by the government but that ends really this week and from then on um a difficult time to head and we'll talk about that and um obviously our people um all my team are working remotely that's working very very well um mine's sort of 11 or 12 on our immediate COVID team response uh but of course the cafe and store staff um are at home unable to work and part of the government subsidy our rescue fire team does remain on site at this point so that's really been the impact what have we really tried to do about if we could move to the next slide um first of all we we uh very quickly leading into um uh probably uh two weeks before we moved into uh level two and level three of before we even knew what that meant uh we had worked very closely with the board around a pandemic plan how we would operate the business and more importantly started to look at some scenario and modeling at that point um that in his Jason would have mentioned earlier on as board is such as China uh we were we were closing to uh tourism we also saw the writing on the ward uh on the on the wall for our own business so uh that plan was developed and approved by the board before we even went into lockdown um we've completed successfully and cost reductions in the business that's right across the business of that some major cost reductions in our expense lines uh reductions uh pretty much across our business in terms of payroll anything up to a 20% reduction and the board have also taken a reduction in their direct defeats um we applied for and received the government wage subsidy across the group um and uh with the hotel uh we worked through and are still working through with jet park um but they've gone through a full restructuring exercise number of people have been made redundant and number have been retained under the government subsidy uh but we have a meeting later this week with jet park to look at stage two airport association that we're part of is doing a major piece of work uh with central government to try and see what are supportive any there are for airport companies that have been significantly hurt as you know we are we are long-term infrastructure owners and uh what we're quite significant capital uh to maintain the assets um so there's a piece of work going uh on in that space we're really covered the people we can move to the next slide um the scenario modelling uh that i talk about there um i think the point that i'll that i'll make here and come back to at the end is that um most airport companies particularly regionally airport companies are significantly hit and hit now um we are fortunate that that we made the decision uh five or sixty years ago that the board then under under the leadership of John Spencer and then implemented by myself and my team uh we we have as you know diverse by the airport company uh and that is i guess bought us time so we have completed um a very conservative um model for argument sake it assumes no in New Zealand activity of any uh of any meaningful sense before October this year uh no and then only a recovery of about 40 percent of passenger numbers through uh 2021 calendar year um and well into 2022 before we have a positive EBITDA really so what is and we've also taken a very conservative view of um our uh leases of our leases at ability to pay us etc no activity out of the hotel really for the balance of this calendar year uh so very very conservative but realistic modelling fortunate we have a major land sale that is unconditional and uh very extremely good um uh family uh significant family multinational business that have agreed uh to further provide a letter of credit to the airport company which gives me confidence to to build the road so to speak so um that delivers about two and a half million dollars of of margin of uh free cash flow into the group early next year so the reality is that we can get through this year and through the June 21 uh almost a slightly positive cash position the balance sheet's taken a bit of a hit and Scott will take you through that but um uh and also we have some work going on on central precinct and again we have the ability hopefully to settle some unconditional land sales with the same degree of confidence around further sureities which will also feed some additional cash into the group um we've only utilised about 65% of our of our um debt funding and in fact we have further facilities that we were intending to take anyway pre-covert and we will still take which will take our funding up to about 30 million and then we will have only utilised not much more than 50% of that by June next year so most uh most of the um cash burn is is funded out of um out of our overdraft during this period and then the land sales um kickback in uh and we're back in positive space being said very supportive um and uh no no issues there around funding next slide please so we have joined with Hamilton City and um and i have spoken to Gary Dyer and others um around the obviously the Crown Infrastructure projects we have put forward two applications if you've had a chance to to review um the submission um she might would be aware there are 23 projects we have submitted for the terminal redevelopment and also for an amalgam of a number of projects around the airport that deal with roading lateral infrastructure our wastewater plant um uh and um various other aspects that again is also worth about 11 million dollars so we have um put those in whether we're successful who knows but under the terminal redevelopment project we're ready to go tenders have been received and and being evaluated the week of lockdown our consent is in with and with your council at the moment and that's um well there was well underway so it is a shovel-ready project um we could be out of the ground um in doing enabling works within a month of um uh a funding line the key for myself and the board will be uh what are the tags that the government um apply if we are successful to the funding mechanism how much of it is um is the loan is a grant etc that's underway and that's part of our recovery program so if we go to the next slide um been important as we've worked through really the devastation of the past three or four weeks to make sure that we still keep our eye on the longer term um for the group and our focus over the next 12 months i won't spend any detailed time here other than to let you know that we have a a clear set um of a clear business plan and a clear set of objectives for FY21 most of those remain in place we are reviewing them currently as a management team um but we are trying to make sure that um we continue uh property is a major contributor and as you can see there potentially to shy about million dollars in land sales in this next 12 month period um operations we continue to maintain um the runway fortunately in our 10 year asset management plan we have a very quiet we just spent close to a million dollars uh finishing in March of this year on some apron works and some pumps uh some other bits and pieces uh but we have a very quiet couple expenditure for ear and nautical over the next 12 to 18 months which couldn't have come at a bit of time but we maintain the assets and you need to know that we uh that we uh that we will um when it comes to uh we'll be working very closely with the NZ to try and obviously kickstart services again and so our whole marketing and uh social media and common strategy will be around exactly that. The hotel is a much more difficult um uh beast as you would have gained from Jason's um presentation but look um we uh we are working now closely with Jet Park to understand what a uh what a plan coming up the other side may look like fortunately it's a hotel that wasn't reliant on international tourism but it is reliant on uh conferencing in particular and uh we we yet to understand the behaviour of the business community as we go forward in this new world so we have just almost spending close to four million on the hotel just prior to lockdown um so uh it is it's a it's a it's a property that um we're going to have to maintain in the meantime and fund an our conservative modelling does um uh does mean that the group can fund its interests in the hotel uh certainly for the next 18 months with um limited activity from it and if we move now into the next slide which is probably uh the financial certain couple of slides here on on sort of financials and in all its scots leading now make our overarching comment here would be you had a lot of detail in the six-month interim results so we decided there was no point in replicating information you will have read so scott will summarise it here and more importantly take you out the other side over the next couple of years. All right good afternoon everyone and thanks Matt for the introduction um yeah i went to i'll too much on the past because it's um unfortunately you became largely irrelevant but i guess just some key takeaways from the slide and what you may have read already um an interim report but it's really that by means in we've built the past couple of years around uh um sustainable so recurring revenue based through passenger growth in the airport business um through a property portfolio that had continued really well for the first half of the year um and go obviously without covered and 19 we expected to continue through the full year and beyond um yeah just some points from a property obviously talking um some big numbers around land sales i guess that they are land sales that have been contemplated um under a ten-year plan the land sales in the pipeline it's not something that we've done as a knee-jerk reaction um all sort of a fire sale type arrangement just to get some cash for the next couple of years these are the land we're selling is um sort of surplus to your normal requirements in fact much of it's actually physically separate from the airport through a gully system so we're not compromising any core assets sort of um future capability by selling this land um very much as um land at surface the airport so it's why it's being sold off um time it has been um yeah just with the hotel obviously it is a new investment for us a new industry investment um really pleased with the early trading performance um yeah and probably pleasing that we didn't other than the initial money to do the property up um attend to some deferred maintenance and things it's actually traded cash flow positive has no it's been profitable with the appreciation and things but um fat ranch able to repay some debt and you know that it's the early vital signs of an occupancy and room rate have been have been certainly in lumped expectation and again kind of ride up until February March it was really just coming into a stride around the conference center and the food and beverage offerings so yeah um I think you know it was um yeah it was looking really positive um and hopefully don't get the other side that's your momentum weekend um we can leverage off again so probably just look um look to the future now and just move to the next slide please yeah so given here just sort of um in six month increments um the remainder of the financial year um also the financial year that we're in and then the following three that are presented in the draft statement of a ten year per se but I think important to focus on ebit because that's sort of a cash flow metric for us um that includes land sales but it excludes of course it's a cost like depreciation which um is around three million dollars a year for us which in the short term um it's not necessarily linear with the with the investment we make into assets so seeing um obviously seeing a reasonably significant decline in the in the next in this calendar year with um yeah across the business certainly going to suffer and that's um as we say in the sort of early six months between December 20 and June next year that's effective this large land sale um taking effect and then as the business kind of gets back on its feet um you can see it's slowly back to cash flow positive so I guess you want to compare the red the red in the blue the blue bars and red line and the green line is sort of where we're going to head now you can see it differently the next sort of 15 to 18 months is going to be a bit painful um but after that um very much back on our feet and not becoming heavily reliant on on land sales certainly outpaste next 18 months so we've only assumed what's already under contract and what some conditionals settle in those numbers so I think that's um the conservative but realistic and conservative on both fronts um certainly the costs we're looking to remove that other business aren't anything that's going to compromise us long term we're not giving out capability but um either we've built or we've managed to hang onto it for as long as we have but it's some um yeah definitely conservative and and look if things don't play out the way we see them doing and certainly not as positive as um they might do this some opportunities if further but for now it's um this sort of is realistic that we can preserve a current capability anywhere um yeah I guess just overlay the net profit slide um yet there's a lot more um probably that the deficits are bigger largely because of the effect of depreciation but ultimately following a fairly similar trend to the cash flow that um look land sales over the next 18 months will get us cash flow positive and we expect by the end of the business to be largely um cash flow positive from its recurring trading to be sustainable um and yeah that that's probably I guess um the main takeaway there um and it's not really built into the slides but just um it's not talked about the effect on the balance sheet look we expect that there will be some impact so a balance sheet around property values almost with equity movements um so as a shareholder that obviously will impact your accounts as well but um I guess out of this is a as a shareholder in a non-financial sense um out of all this we're preserving our cool capability um we're not compromising any about your nautical capability um I think yeah in terms of what the service will keep delivering that shouldn't be compromised or at least our ability to tell it um that was really well I had just um never do other financials so it might be a prospect to map to wrap up then this is the last slide um my apologies we've taken a bit of your time but look I think the key themes here really uh as I opened up we we we we um hit this uh situation in a very strong position um and uh in a very strong balance sheet uh a record year um the foresight of the diversification through our 10 year group strategy um here's I think really bought this company time uh perhaps unlike some other regional airports that I think will need to go to their shareholders very uh quickly for additional funding or through their through their bank funding lines um we don't need to um that non-revenue has been absolutely critical to to and in fact ironically we never predictive a COVID um uh 19 scenario but we did predict a loss of aeronautical income through um cessation of services or reduced services so um uh has been one I'm the same and look um overall um the recovery as Scott has mentioned will be modest um but sustainable um and as I want to keep restating uh we won't need to go to our core debt at this stage or funding lines to to fund this we can fund it um out of out of in effect the working capital um and most importantly I think for you as the shareholders there is no requirement for the board to come to its shareholders for support and we don't see a scenario at all that um requires the shareholders to assist the airport company in the foreseeable future so that's it from me sorry andra I apologise we're over time but um happy to take questions if you've got time yeah no thanks guys um I think we were aware that a bit of extra time was going to be required for you guys with uh such a massive impact um I just got a quick question about the flight school um when would they not get back to level one or possibly could they operate at level two? Well in fact Scotts just had some advice today it could well be that the pilots that are well through their qualification will be able to start flying under level three so as soon as next week we could see some flight activity um but it will be to your point andra down at level one probably there'll be the social distancing issues when you have an instructor and a trainee pilot on board so I think we're we're still around clear and so are L3 as to when that will be um I think it's worth noting that um we don't quite know where we're going to go with L3 in the sense that they've got a hundred about 180 pilots currently at the airport in Hamilton out at the accommodation at the airport so I think we'll find the phone for the next few months the question is how whether they're going to be the logistics of moving pilots across borders for training and actually pilots are there if not a death of pilots in the global marketplace as a result of the catastrophe for the airlines so I think those two would suggest to us that we've got difficult times ahead past the end of 2020 with L3 yeah that makes sense um yeah I think um it's as you've both noted the stage that you you're at with your um property development has been a very fortunate thing if this had occurred at the at the beginning of that it would have been far more um financially destructive but does anyone else have any queries okay that not being in case luck thank you very much I really comprehensive update and um great to see um you recovered from the shock and um being really positive and constructive going forward so thanks very much to you both thank you thank you thank you thank you thank you and I see we have Kelvin sorry what was that okay so we got Kelvin and also as Peter available yes I am oh great so thanks Kelvin and Peter um and we'll let you get onto the shared services thanks mr chairman and thanks for the opportunity to speak with you the south of the known you've been provided with a copy of the company statement of intent and half yearly report to 31 to semen 2019 and I'm conscious of the fact this is the first opportunity I've had as the new-ish chair of the last to talk to you so I wanted to start by just briefly introducing myself and then I wanted to talk a little bit about the company's transformation role how we're going to do things differently what it means for your council and then I want to conclude with some remarks about COVID-19 but I guess the key point is that certainly from the board of last disrespect of the organisation has never been more relevant than it will be in a post COVID-19 recovery period so the first point I wanted to make is that my family has been heavily invested in the Waikato for a very long time my mother's family came to this region in 1865 my father's family came to this region in 1880s and all my family live in the region my mum lives in Hauraki district my sister lives in Thames Coromandel I have another sister in Hamilton a brother in Waipa district and after 44 years angia leaving Auckland next week and moving to Cambridge so we very much look forward to becoming Waipa district council rate pares from 1st of May so as you can see my family's been heavily invested in the success of the region and it's one of the reasons I took the job the other reason is the clarity of the opportunity and I've spent 21 years in local government governance across multiple CCOs and clarity of role is actually quite unusual in this case the company's vision is to have Waikato councils working together in the best way possible for the collective benefit of their man their communities which means less burden on ratepayers happier communities and council staff and more effective councils so as we've set out in our statement of intent the organisation really exists to do three things first of all to create effectiveness and efficiency gains for shareholders such as you secondly to help increase the influence of the region and thirdly to help shareholders provide a better customer experience what less does is provide an opportunity to think regionally without boundaries and to then help councils use that thing locally to improve the wellbeing of the community so thinking regionally means that rather than individual councils trying to solve their problems individually less can help them work them out with the cost of that spread while still allowing local choices to whether to implement solutions locally I think that it's fair to say my observation would be that over the years of its existence the organisation's done a good job but I think one of the reasons that I've been hired is that there was an opportunity seen to be able to really grasp the company's potential so when I was hired the board said that it wanted to undertake a number of transformative projects at place and for that reason we are going to and are driving the organisation harder and faster and earlier this year the board committed to do just that we are looking to be bolder more disruptive to enable you to help you transform how you and other Waka Tau councils operate we also won't be afraid of failing and by that I mean recognising the opportunity is worth pursuing as long as we do it fast coming from the private sector having spent 35 years in the private sector my observation would be that there's nothing wrong with failure as long as you fail fast and fail cheap so within that in mind and looking ahead over the next 18 months there are really three core elements to what we're doing there are some key strategic projects which we'll be looking to advance as fast as possible and you'll see those projects in the statement of intent there are some businesses usual projects and in addition I've asked for a re-examination of some of the work that we're doing to see whether we should stop doing it as you'll appreciate it's it's really fundamental to perceptions of success of an organisation that they seem to be making progress month by month so one of the things we've done is introduced a lot more careful tracking about what it is that we're doing and whether we're being successful and we're looking to improve the communications to key council staff as well I've said to my board colleagues and you'll be aware I'm sure that the that everyone sits around the last board with the exception of me as a chief executive of one of the member councils I've said to my board colleagues that they are really the difference between less succeeding and failing that and the reason for that is that they are the ones who will dictate the resourcing and prioritisation and cooperation which is accorded to less projects and I made the point pretty clearly that without their total commitment the organisation will fail but equally their success lesser success will be their success in vice versa so turning now to what it means for your council think three things first of all you should consider this organisation as an extension of your vision of building the future together to promote the well-being of Y-PAR district and its people we've both got a role to play in providing solutions to the high growth region of the Waikatoa we both recognise the need to do more with less to drive cost out of local councils we both want to ensure that nationally the Waikatoa region punches above its weight by showing that the region can provide joined up services across the region and we both want to improve the well-being of the community indeed it's in your vision secondly as an organisation as I've said before we're not limited by boundaries we're tasked with thinking regionally to enable you to act better locally and I think the opportunities to work with you and your companion councils to achieve your aspirations are boundless regardless and possibly even more but cause of COVID-19 thirdly obviously by necessity we need resource to achieve our outcomes and you'll see that some of the initiatives that we've proposed in the statement of intent will require some upfront investment in order to achieve some mid to long-term savings now I said I would finish with a few words on coronavirus it won't surprise you to know that as a board we've discussed very early on whether we should make any substantive changes to our work program to reflect what will be a new reality what we concluded indeed was that in fact we should keep doing what we're doing because it's going to be even more important more over it's going to help rebuild the region and increase resilience our view is that in a post COVID-19 period during the recovery period there'll be need in the region for at least the following three things first security of public works to enable the private sector to plan long range and I think importantly commit to training and for their staff to commit the stay in the region secondly a demonstration of restraint by public bodies on what might be perceived as non-essential spending in other words doing more with less and thirdly motivation and encouragement and development of current council staff now we're planning to deliver all of those already through our work program has set out on the statement of intent so thank you for the opportunity to talk to you I obviously wish that I could have spoken with you in person but no doubt that a opportunity will arise sometime shortly in the future Kelvin and I are more than happy to take any questions Mr Chair but I wondered Kelvin if there is any additional points that do you want to make? All right well-covenant Peter thank you. Okay thanks very much for that yeah as you mentioned the less has been active in there well 20 councils for a number of years now and being very successful particularly with Rata the roading accord but what's happening now is an absolute step change and I totally agree with what you said about it being more important post-COVID rather than less so yeah I wish we were success of course now questions I think clear yes yeah yeah thanks Andrew and great to mention Ryzen and I would say to Kelvin I did see through some questions but two two um a ones that I'd just like to ask in this forum um the first one is that um you know you've made a strong case for continuing how you're going at the moment you know that all those things that you're focusing on will be more important than either when we're dealing in the post-COVID era I guess um but a lot of the things that that are done rely on the um I suppose the goodwill of councils and releasing resources from from their business to work on less stuff and I can foresee that councils are actually going to be pretty hard pressed with their own own staffing resources dealing with you know extra things that have come out of the woodwork to do with COVID-19 and so what assurance can you give us that that you won't sort of find yourself high and dry that you can't get the sort of resource that you do need you know from the individual councils that have normally been really supportive because you know your start just completely committed you know to this other work. Kelvin would you mind if I answered that question first and then sure maybe there's a few additional points you want to make I think Councillor thank you that's a that's a great question um the good news is we had um happy to say thought of that as well and um one of the earliest things that we did well before lockdown was when we could see this thing coming was to reach out to councils to ask them to think about whether in the context of any redeployment of assets and people that they were doing whether there were going to be some people that might in fact be freed up to be able to work on some of our projects to make them go faster and I was pleasantly surprised particularly from some of the smaller councils to be honest about the positive response that we got in terms of offering up staff that's the first point the second point is that more specifically Kelvin's been in touch with the chief executives of all of the councils I think is recently as yesterday Kelvin where we've set out some specific skill sets that we're looking for in order to be able to advance some of our strategic projects so as I say a great question um surprisingly positive response from the from the councils that we've reached out to but you're absolutely right um the resourcing issue may even flow over time and it's something we're acutely conscious of Kelvin did you have any points to add? Look I think that sort of covers it all off pager to be honest goodbye. Well that's really encouraging actually I'm it's good to get excuse me it's good to get that clarification that's great and now the question I had was about the energy and carbon management that's mentioned in the SI here I wasn't sure um whether that is the carbon order that our council is sort of before the last election um we uh that was one of the directions that we gave staff that we wanted to get something organised and that which would help us um I suppose formulated a plan you know for climate change and that and this energy management that's mentioned that that that last does is that feeding into that that audit or not? So the the the shorter answer is council are the uh no it's well it's certainly not the audit that you're referring to um I don't see any particular reason why um the uh people that we use to that we engage to provide that support to councils could not help with that audit if that was something that the why part executive team were we're interested in doing um but I'm not actually privy to the particular the status of the particular piece of work that you're referring to um I know that um Martin Lunch who's one of the guys that tends to work with why part district council has been doing some um the spoke work in this area but I'm not sure whether it specifically relates to that report that you're referring to? Okay oh well thanks thanks for the clarification okay any more questions? No okay well hey thank you very much for for that presentation and um yeah particularly now in a in a period of significant change um that's really uh yeah great to see the positivity we have going forward even in uh with the with the weird wheel we have around us at the moment so yeah thanks Peter Kelvin very much thank you very much Mr. Cheney does yes and I see Andrew Michael is available and we'll talk to us about the LGFA thank you for the opportunity um I'll just maybe make a few brief comments and then touch on the current environment and then leave some time for uh for questions um so LGFA started in 2012 that currently has 67 member councils with a number of others in the process of joining and the current environment is probably just you know even for the councils that don't have any debt they realise that you know having access to finances and poorness it's sort of probably speeding up you know there uh their time table for joining um LGFA is based on similar models in the Scandinavian countries the longest of those is in Denmark that's been going for 130 years now so what LGFA wants is to be a very long term provider of financing to the local authority sector um the objectives are interest savings on councils debt to provide a range of borrowing options so short term and longer term financing and probably the most important one is access to debt markets and that's been the area that's perhaps been the most challenging for not over the past couple of five months in terms of the financials um the profit for the year to join 2020 which was forecast to be 10 million is on tracks we've been running the part numbers for April uh yesterday and again the monthly profit is on track um a lot of the forecasting that's in the draft SOI is just out of date it's just been superseded by the events that we've seen the last few months but that said just remember that LGFA has 10 billion dollars of lending to the sector so we borrow from investors and on land at every time we do we take a small margin so the profit really on all that lending is locked in until those loans mature so even though they may well be some variability in profit a lot of it is is locked in that said the profit ability probably shouldn't be your your primary concern it is where councils get the savings is in the savings on the interest costs and certainty around accessing of finance so that's probably the the key thing um the current environment um interest rates are low so maybe that's one little bit of good use for councils so short-term interest rates councils like yourself can borrow below 1% now um longer-term um we just completed a one billion dollar debt issue um uh just over a week ago so we borrowed for six years and we borrowed at 1.46% for a billion dollars so we will add on uh 20 points uh to councils or 25 points to wipe our offenders so you'd be accessing longer-term money six year money at around 1.7% just to give you some idea of a a borrowing cost so that's you know one bit of a good news um probably two or three weeks ago we were receiving record borrowing requests from councils there was a lot of councils knowing that maybe you know fee income is dropping and they needed to uh get more money in to to cover that so we've never had a month we've had a higher amount of borrowing costs um LGFA was the first count uh first uh non-government entity uh well entity other than the government to issue um in New Zealand since uh the level 4 lockdown was imposed um for a while on besters were very reluctant to invest it's just you know they're worried even if we buy it we won't be able to sell things um and it's just that whole risk of vision but we had two developments one was LGFA have a one billion dollar standby facility from the New Zealand government that expires next year but the minister of finance provided a letter to LGFA saying that the government would roll that over for a further period of time so that support from the government was just it's really symbolic to investors that there's going to be that ongoing support from the government for LGFA the second thing that occurred is the reserve bank announced that they were going to buy back government bonds are subsequent to that they added LGFA to the listed securities that they're able to buy so they signaled that buy back uh up to three billion dollars of LGFA bonds from investors and it was that that really gave the confidence to investors that if we buy them there's actually going to be another huge buyer in the market for that so again you know the level of support that we're getting from the government has been extremely important um there's going to be significant challenges for councils um particularly in the 2021 sort of financial year um part of the working group that DIA are running looking at uh doing a lot of modeling on council financial performance uh this well for the remainder of this year and uh and next year and next feeding into a lot of the other governments of the workstream such as the recovery sort of a workstream so there's some quite sobering reading coming out of that for WIPAR you're probably well positioned in terms of your debt levels not high relative to some of the other higher growth councils in in New Zealand um so yeah there are a lot of challenges and that's probably one of the challenges for us is that potentially we're going to get breaches of the financial covenants uh in the next financial year not not this financial year so today we've never had a breach of the any of the financial covenants but you know if revenue falls significantly for councils with a large amount of debt to start with then they could well breach that net debt to to revenue uh covenants so that's something we'll have to uh deal with but for those growth councils you know one of the last tools that have really got us you know having to cut their caps and again that's not particularly conducive to starting growth in the economy and is working against a little bit of what the government wants to achieve um so I just like to you we appreciate that there's no compulsion for councils to use LGFA you're still free to borrow from any other sources that you want so I just like to acknowledge our Ken and this team because WIPAR was one of the yearly supporters of LGFA um we very much value um you'll support our and you know the professional relationship that we have thanks Andrew um I think yeah almost goes without saying but I'll say it anybody LGGFA is another great um contributor to the local government um seen generally and certainly um well I guess WIPAR hasn't used um your services that greatly we certainly intend to in the future possibly even more with COVID possibly not we we don't know yet do we Ken yeah that's um that that's true we we don't know but um yeah but very very comforted by that by that 1.7% number uh Andrew that's um yeah that that is um that is very well priced uh borrowing ability I like the one that was below 1% even better but yeah short to possibly isn't us uh that much no thanks Andrew um does anyone else have any questions Bruce and then clear you're still muted Bruce press the space bar there we go no no you need to keep pressing it mate oh okay I'm learning I've changed machines one doesn't work so once in the bin soon and we just um played 33 share capital I know WIPAR has got 200,000 shares at that point 4% just a simple one mal-redistrict have got double ours but a 9.9 of a percent did you explain that? uh yes the shareholding um is just something sort of historical so when LGFA was started it needed 25 million of equity um so there was I think 9 or 10 councils that were the initial subscribers and then they onsold some of the issues to a second group of councils that came in as shareholders um so LGFA pay a small dividend to councils on their shareholder um that is 2% over cost of funds but our cost of funds might only be like 1.5% at the moment so on a hundred thousand dollars of shares you're only going to be getting like a three or 4,000 dollar dividend so that is really not material so the level of equity you have is really not that important it is the savings that you get on your borrowing costs that are going to be the big you know drivers of why you know councils should be members of LGFA so it really doesn't give you a lot of advantage over you know a council that is a non-shareholder um because again they're still getting the same borrowing benefits that you are it's just simply a fact we needed some councils to put in some equity to get the thing off off the ground so again you know we're grateful for the councils that did that and thank you all it's just interested of doubling a figure and being in ordinary terms and thinking well how did you get to that so no thank you I just I just worked it out for you Bruce um it's it's a rounding thing it's actually we've actually got .444 of a percent and when you double that you get .88 so it's just rounding up and down thank you mr. Chia so knowledgeable oh clear yeah thanks the question i had is about LGFA saying one of the principles is that they'll demonstrate social and environmental responsibility and one question that i've been asking in past is will LGFA consider introducing something like green financing or environmental bonds you know like other productivity commission did a report to a low emissions economy you know a couple of years ago the highlighted that actually there's a bit of a gap um in New Zealand with this kind of financing where councils could borrow for a project that would be you know reducing emissions or for environmental outcomes and usually it's sort of a slight margin lease or something just to say it's a good thing to be doing and we want to encourage councils um do you think LGFA would do that or are you talking to government about that? I thank you for that question um it is the whole environmental issues have been pushed a little bit to the back at the environment because we're doing what's going on but LGFA has done a significant amount of work on that and we are intending to offer green financing to councils so remembering that it's not LGFA that is doing things with the money we're just on lending us the resources in the middle um we've actually got all the documents up and ready to go but the issue is we're going to need councils to identify green projects um and also there's three categories so there's green social and sustainable so for example a lot of the water things actually come under sustainable so there's a whole industry around it and it involves identifying things and also there's a certification process involved on that so I could probably speak to you for a day on this topic because it is if you see the documents they you know it must be like a hundred pages long and we've got all that really so it is all happening but it will be it's not going to be compulsory it will be up to each council is to how they use that but green investing is a big theme globally probably particularly in Europe probably less so in in the US but certainly it does give you better access to to deck markets if you can it's your green framework well I'm thrilled to hear that you're working on it I actually think you should report on it so that you're actually preparing or you know working on a proposal because I think a lot of people would be looking for that and yeah just say well congratulations I think it's great that you've made here some I suppose some groundwork progress and yeah look forward to seeing yeah when you can actually make an announcement yeah we did we have a council day each year sort of in July and we did flag that it was something we intend to do so we would you know give the update again this year but it is something that's definitely happening and we're more than happy to come and speak to you if you want to have you know more in-depth discussion about that side of the business thank you thanks um any other questions for Andrew no okay that being the case thank you very much for zooming with us and yeah always good might see you in fresh one of these days yeah no please yeah okay thanks very much yes okay well thanks for that everybody um we have a recommendation runs from A to G I'm not even going to attempt to read them all out I'm sure you can yeah oh so sorry Andrew probably the thing we just need to turn our attention to because because obviously a key part of that that series of recommendations is the three letters that are in in the appendices of appendix um appendix four five and six um so so I do just wonder with just before you before you put the recommendation um we for it is just we're just seeking any any input into those those three letters because obviously when we when you actually do put the recommendation you you will be essentially mocking in those letters yeah I think for that can you you're very right I did think of that um I read through them and I I felt they seemed pretty appropriate as they are um because particularly with um oh cast my mind back now particularly with the airport um we acknowledged that there was going to be a major revision in their in their SOI um but yeah is there anyone does anyone have any thoughts on a no all good thanks for that Ken but I think we're all good so um could I have a mover please thank you Bruce and the seconder thanks blue cheers all in favour all right all right country no it's carried okay moving on to item number nine and I see nada's there um Ken did you want to introduce or no look I man I'm very happy to leave this um to to nada to um to take us through the the financial report um yeah I I guess the only thing um of significance and again there is a health warning there a little bit like um like the four monthly report that you saw at the last council meeting um obviously anything in that um in that full cast column um is um yeah is obviously outdated by the um by the COVID events um so um yeah so um a huge effort has um gone and right across some cross-couts on the last um in the last two or three weeks um to um yeah to reforca us and you should see the results of their reforca us and you should have a obviously a quite a different um forecast column in the neeks um financial report you see but yeah but look let's see dam happy for nada to take us through the report okay thanks very much thanks Ken um good afternoon everyone so at the currently standing at the end of March the total income is currently at 74% of the forecast and the operating expenditure is at 72% of the four-year forecast we have vested assets of 11.8 million recognised to date and that's currently 94% of the forecast discovered assets is 402 000 development and reserve contributions of 4.4 million have been received to date and subsidies and grants are at 47% of the forecast um we have capital expenditure to date of 71.3 million which is 51% of the forecast and there have been no major budget changes this month due to reforcasting happening now um there was one arbitrage arrangement made on the 12th March that utilised six million dollars of short-term fixed borrowings um and it was on March terms mature and in June and we'll yield approximately 13 000 of net interest um the rates we have the 62.1 million that's been set for the year um prior years outstanding at this time of the 62 000 and we have currently 464 000 outstanding at the year to date and then I'll take the rest of the report as being read and if anyone's got any questions okay any questions not a big change um really to the what we have presented the council meeting so um yeah we're pretty much thanks for that nada um that's great and there being no questions I'll ask for a move for the recommendation thank you Roger and a seconder to second thanks clear oh thanks clear I'll catch you next time Philip um all in favour hi hi country no it's carried thank you very much and thanks nada and um we'll move on to item 10 health and safety team oh yeah look I think I'm issued yes Steve yes Steve is still there so um yeah this is absolutely um Steve shores baby and um and affect beavers beavers well who's joined it so yeah we had to to Stephen be great welcome Stephen beaves hi guys another good new story we need some of them no yeah uh stiff to want to start off oh yeah yeah yeah all yours all mine okay so um I take it that you guys have have read the report um and um the attachments um to this uh I do see that there are a couple of questions from clear but is there any anything else that you guys would like to ask before I get to those questions from clear it looks like the floor is yours clear you had a couple of questions yeah well I mean um the first one was that there were four the council entrance ways with the the location of a number of um accidents so if you looked into those entrance ways is there something to do with the entrance ways like um yeah beaver you want to do you want to do what oh yeah yeah they were they were just the two um trips in an entrance ways um and we did get property to have a look um and there wasn't anything of significance that we found oh yeah can you can you guys hear me now yeah yeah yeah so we didn't find anything of significance um of why they tripped the only thing we it was sort of at the lip where the doors um kind of closed and this is at Cambridge so I did probably did have a look at those um but we couldn't find anything that would have caused um those trips and we haven't had any reported since so it may have been just one of those things but we are continuing to monitor anyway yeah yeah oh no that's what I mean it would just be um our luck that you know our facilities are causing causing a yeah a problem for people that are coming into visit yeah yeah so I just thought it'd be good to know a bit more about that yeah okay can you hear me yes yes wonderful I'm so sorry I lost my my voice there for a minute so I clear I understood you had another question as well and that was regarding um what ways we have to keep track of how health and safety resources and processes are being utilized yeah that's a really good question um perhaps if I um if you go to the the A3 or the big report on a page um above the health and safety due diligence plan monitoring above that is the health and safety lead indicators now uh these lead indicators are basically the resources um and the contractors that we use and so essentially what we pay for um and that's how we monitor and provide to you the details and what we're spending our health and safety budget on we do have a very small health and safety budget obviously um but what does health and safety lead indicators show you is that we um we pay an ongoing fee to the Waikato occupational health consultancy who deliver our health monitoring services we also provide um money to the EAP service which is um so provides um I guess counseling services to all of our staff uh we also have training health and safety training so we have set aside 27,000 full health and safety training in the manual year and that's that obviously is first aid refreshes and um i health and safety committee training as well as any investigation training which we are looking at at the moment and our our regular conflict training which is obviously comes out of that budget as well and these are all reported through these reporting mechanisms to yourselves and also to the executive team so I guess that's one of our due diligence and how we show that we are utilizing um external resources and finances appropriately oh no that that's a great explanation and I can see how it all fits together I guess um I was wondering about how you knew if a just individual staff members were actually um you know knowledgeable about health and safety practices or if they were starting a new task or something that they they they did actually get the right briefing and the stuff like that like um are you confident that that kind of um sort of more grassroots um of those processes and working well as well? I think we feel free to jump in here but um I'm actually very confident because we have some very good well-educated health and safety representatives now and I must say they are committed they attend the meetings they go back to their respective teams and they disseminate that information um you know we're making sure that any training is out there I've got Bev and Terry now working with all staff and specially team leaders and supervisors about how to keep this task safe um I know that's great thank you yes Roger yes thank you can you hear me all right I can oh it doesn't seem to be coming through my headphones um I think this is a great report um but out the question I have is is there any way that we can assess some of the external influences on our teams health and safety from Covid-19? Yes absolutely and again Bev feel free to jump in here this report only covers the period from November through to February so um critically it misses essentially misses all the Covid-19 that will come in the next report but yes absolutely we are um we have a staff monitor or staff register which we monitor the health and well-being of all our staff any that have immunocompromised health issues we are aware of where our staff are what they're doing and with our slightly moving to level three next week we've gone out to all managers to advise us of where exactly their staff are going to be working whether they will be continuing to work from home whether we will have some like our parks operators working back out in the community and from a health and safety perspective we're working up some really good protocols around how to keep them all safe so I hope that's answered your your question council yeah I was I was more um wondering about whether any of the external influences of which we've got not control you know that they're actually finding in their own family circumstances and something like that but it's actually affecting their their mental state which obviously is a health and safety issue. I can come in here if you like Steve um of um of just coming out of a webinar with EMA in which one of New Zealand's leading people on health and safety poor java was part of so that actually ruled out quite a few ways on how this can be managed in multiple levels and I know that our by-part team have been working along those same lines so you know this is all pretty new to everybody so we're still writing up those protocols and um and hopefully getting everything in place prior to actually going out next week on level three. Oh good great to see those thanks. Great um anybody else no I just like to say it's it's great to see your health and safety program maturing each each report that we get um and I just wanted to say I think um your your one page Gary's health and safety commitment is a that's a really really good um yeah I think to put in place um there's nothing like everybody in the organisation seeing that the CEO is committed to to the program so uh yeah congratulations on that. Thank you. Thank you. Yeah. Cheers well done. Okay so um I have a recommendation to accept the report to whoever move the please thank you clear thank you Elwyn um all those in favour please say aye aye contrary no that's carried thanks ladies that's that's terrific well done Phil um we're just going to pass uh pass a motion to move into public excluded and then go off live oh thanks Roger and the seconder thanks Susan all in favour aye aye contrary no it's carried so Sam will let you do your thing